---
layout: post
title:  The Bali programming language
categories: Programming
tags: Java Languages
---

Bali is an alternative language for the JVM that shares Java semantics but with a better 
syntax. The name comes from the small island right to the east of Java.

Ok, Bali isn't a programming language, at least it is not an existing programming language. It
is only a desire of a Java programmer that fell in love with Scala in his middle age crisis.

At the beggining Java was great, you didn't have to take care of the memory, the API was very
complete and documented, it ran unmodified in different environments and the tools were
good... But time passes and you start seeing other languages in a different way.

Java is not as appealing as she was when she was young. Of course she is now more mature and
has improved over the years (generics, enums and lambdas are good proofs), but others start to
catch your eye.

The problem is that you shared a lot of things with Java, you planned your future with her 
and you know her deep inside. You don't want to throw all that to the thrash can and start
from scratch again!

Anyway, the thrill of trying new things is hard and you start flirting with other languages.
Scala, Groovy, Ruby, Python but most of them are dynamic (with its good things, and bad
things) so they don't completely replace Java.

Oracle should be aware that a lot of developers consider changing language (not platform)
because it evolves slow and it is very verbose (slow to develop with). But adapting Java is
slow and should be done with care because there are a lot of code and  tools to support.

They could avoid that situation creating a new programming language which shares the same
Java semantics but more appealing to develop with.

If they do, most of developers trying to find an alternative would consider their proposal
(because we trust Oracle) so they keep platform control, and it will be less fragmented.

It is important to note that if Oracle itself develop this language, tool vendors and
middleware developers would support it better than if it is developed by other company. Just
because they are the owners of the Java Platform and this assures the new language will be
supported properly.

No other JVM language has had a massive adoption yet (each of them for their own reasons)
but if Oracle itself provides an alternative, lots of programmers looking for another language
would take this option seriously.

These are the things I would value in this language:

----

## Don't rely on filesystem structure (directories and file names)

You end up with a lot of files and nested directories even for the smallest projects. Bali
could support a flat package layout. This way you can start coding a package in a file, and
split it in a directory __only__ when it grows. Ie:

    org.example.pack1/               // Allow the use directories with dots instead nested ones
    org.example.pack1.subpack/
    org.example.pack2/
    org.example.pack3.bali           // Allow to use a file to hold all package classes

## More than one public class per file

This point is related to the previous one. It will allow to start with a file and split it in 
different files when needed (no more twenty line classes in their own file)... My editor is
gonna run out of tabs!

## Getters and setters as fields

Allow to define `getters` as `<Type> $name ()` and `setters` as `void $name (<Type> newVal)`
allowing methods with these patterns to be accessed as fields. This way you scale functionaly
not having to change client code (class users) if you change a field by a method or the
opposite. Ie: you can start with a final field and after that change that for a `getter/setter`
pair without changing all clients. For example:

{% highlight java %}
// This class...
class Person {
    public String name;
}

// Could evolve to this one...
class Person {
    private String name;

    public String $name () {
        return name;
    }
    
    public void $name (String name) {
        this.name = name;
    }
}

// Without needing to change the client
class Main {
    public static void main (String [] args) {
        Person p = new Person ();
        p.name = "Elmo";
    }
}
{% endhighlight %}

## Multiline strings

This feature would be very useful for writing JDBC queries or embedded XML. An example worths
one thousand words:

{% highlight java %}
String s = """
  select *
  from persons
  where age > 18
""";
{% endhighlight %}

## Default and named params

Implementing this would save a lot of overloaded methods. It would also ease the creation of
inmutable objects. And lastly, it could improve DSLs creation.

{% highlight java %}
class Car {
    public final String brand, model;
    public final int year;
  
    Car (String brand, String model, int year = 2000) {
        this.brand = brand;
        this.model = model;
        this.year = year;
    }
    
    static Car build () {
        return new Car (
            brand: "ford",
            model: "focus"
        );
    }
}
{% endhighlight %}

## Remove semicolon whenever is possible

This one would improve readability and speed up editing. No need to say anymore :)

## Last lambda outside parenthesis

For me it seems ugly to finish a sentence with `});` if you could end it with just `}` it would
be clearer!

{% highlight java %}
// This call...
build ("Widget", evt -> {
    evt.toString ();
});

// Could be:
build ("Widget") (evt) -> {
    evt.toString ();
}
{% endhighlight %}

## Add identity operator (`===`) and use `==` as equals

Having to write `equals` always seemed too verbose for me. Creating another operator for
identity (`===`) and using `==` for equality would be more clear.

## Null safe navigation operator (`?.`)

Adopt the [null safe navigation operator][nullop] as it is used in [Groovy]. No more nested
`if (var != null)`

## Elvis `?:` operator

The [Elvis operator][elvisop] is also a nice addition to handle `null` references. Copying it
from [Groovy] would be a good choice!

## Override (not define) operators

Another good feature of [Groovy] is [operator overloading][opoverload]. this can enhance the 
code readability. On the opposite, you have [Scala]'s [operator definition][opdef] that can 
lead to a mess if programmers are careless. Ie: you can define the `*/+-` operator if you want.

## Markdown in Javadoc

This way it would be easier to maintain the code documented ;)

----

With these changes, the language would be compatible and would be an evolution, 
not a revolution to Java. This language could be a proving ground to test new additions to
Java.

I was a one programming language man until now, I cheated Java with Scala and Groovy. Anyway 
among all languages you have for the JVM, none of them are just a faster (to write programs)
Java.

And you, what improvements would you do to the Java language?


[Groovy]: http://groovy.codehaus.org
[nullop]: http://groovy.codehaus.org/Operators#Operators-SafeNavigationOperator(?.)
[elvisop]: http://groovy.codehaus.org/Operators#Operators-ElvisOperator(?:)
[opoverload]: http://groovy.codehaus.org/Operator+Overloading
[Scala]: http://www.scala-lang.org/
[opdef]: http://docs.scala-lang.org/tutorials/tour/operators.html
